Add privacy considerations (#509)
openid/OpenID4VP: openid-4-verifiable-presentations-1_0.md

Origin:
: An identifier for the calling website or native application, asserted by the web or app platform. A web origin is the combination of a scheme/protocol, host, and port, with port being omitted when it matches the default port of the scheme. An app platform may use a linked web origin, or use a platform-specific URI for the app origin.

> 

Reviewer: fixed

        |                 |-------------------------------------------------->|
        |                 |                                                   |
        |                 |                                                   |

>         |       User Authentication / Consent                                 |

Reviewer: this was intentional. we usually say user authentication, not end-user authentication

        |                 |      (DCQL query)                                 |
        |                 |-------------------------------------------------->|
        |                 |                                                   |

>         |       User Authentication / Consent                                 |

Reviewer: same as above

* The concept of a Client Identifier Prefix to enable deployments of this specification to use different mechanisms to obtain and validate metadata of the Verifier beyond the scope of [@!RFC6749].
* A mechanism specifying the use of OpenID4VP with the Digital Credentials API (see (#dc_api)).

> Presentation of Credentials using OpenID for Verifiable Presentations can be combined with the user authentication using [@SIOPv2], and the issuance of OAuth 2.0 Access Tokens.

Reviewer: same a above

- Custom URL scheme as an `authorization_endpoint` (for example, `openid4vp://` as defined in (#openid4vp-scheme))
- URL (including Domain-bound Universal Links/App link) as an `authorization_endpoint`

For a cross device flow, either of the above options MAY be presented as a QR code for the End-User to scan using a Wallet or an arbitrary camera application on a user-device.

> The Wallet can also be invoked from the web or a native app using the Digital Credentials API as described in (#dc_api). As described in detail in (#dc_api), DC API provides privacy, security (see (#session_fixation)), and user experience benefits (particularly in the cases where an End-User has multiple Wallets).

Reviewer 2: Seems like we are filling an inconsistency here by replacing End-User Authentication in the diagram about with User Authentication and then changing this from user to End-User. Any objection to just using End-User consistently?

Reviewer: it's actually very intentional. in general we use "end-user" but there are places, where end-user does not make sense. like, we don't say end-user authorization, end-user authentication, etc. we just say user authentication and user authorization. and i don't want to artificially say end-user authentication in this spec.

    |              |      (response_uri, nonce, state, dcql_query)                 |
    |              |-------------------------------------------------------------->|
    |              |                            |                                  |

>     |                  User Authentication / Consent                               |

Reviewer: same as above

unlinkability properties is the use of batch issuance, which is supported in [@?OpenID4VCI], with individual credentials
being presented only once.

Note that the nature of the issuer of the credential may leak unnecessary information such as nationality or state of residence.

### Strictly Necessary {#strictly_necessary}

* Verifiers SHOULD design queries that request only the minimal set of claims and credentials needed to fulfill the specified purposes. DCQL helps facilitate this. 

### Claim Value Filtering {#claim_value_filtering}

> Wallets SHOULD suppress claims from the response if their values do not match the requested values filter, unless user consent overrides this.

Author: A user could mistatkingly do so. Privacy by design principle recommends taking precautions against such errors.

> Wallets SHOULD suppress claims from the response if their values do not match the requested values filter, unless user consent overrides this.

Reviewer: i actually do not understand this recommendation. wallet should not be asking the user to share more than what verifier requested and the wallet must not return claims more than verifier requested.

https://openid.net/certification/conformance-testing-for-openid-for-verifiable-presentations/

# Privacy Considerations {#privacy_consideratins}

> Many privacy considerations are specific to the credential format and associated proof type used in any particular presentation.

Reviewer 3: nit: "used in a particular presentation"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many privacy considerations are specific to the credential format and associated proof type used in a particular presentation.
```

This section mainly focuses on privacy considerations that are specific to the presentation protocol, while also addressing

> considerations considerations that apply across some common credential formats and the treatments at wallets and verifiers. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
considerations that apply across some common credential formats and the treatments at wallets and verifiers. 
```

In both cases listed here, it needs to be considered that returning an error
response can also leak information about the processing outcome of `values`.

## User Consent and Choice {#user_consent_and_choice}

> * Wallets should obtain explicit, informed consent from the End-User before releasing any Verifiable Credential or Presentation to a Verifier.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Wallets SHOULD obtain explicit, informed consent from the End-User before releasing any Verifiable Credential or Presentation to a Verifier.
```

Reviewer 3: Curious if "must" is a stronger ask and applicable here?

* If an error prevents the Wallet from honoring a request (e.g., missing credentials or mismatched claim values), the Wallet should inform the user in a privacy-preserving way.

## Purpose Legitimacy and Specification {#purpose_legitimacy_and_specification}

> * The verifier ensures that the purposes are sufficiently specific and are communicated before the time the information is collected. For example, it is shown before the presentation request is sent or is sent in the request to the wallet. In the latter case, the wallet communicates them with the user before the user can make their choice. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* The Verifier ensures that the purposes are sufficiently specific and are communicated before the time the information is collected. For example, it is shown before the presentation request is sent or is sent in the request to the wallet. In the latter case, the Wallet communicates them with the user before the user can make their choice. 
```

> * The Verifier ensures that the purposes are sufficiently specific and are communicated before the time the information is collected. For example, it is shown before the presentation request is sent or is sent in the request to the wallet. In the latter case, the Wallet communicates them with the user before the user can make their choice. 

Reviewer 3: nit suggestion: " information collection purpose is sufficiently specific and communicated before collection.
For example, the purpose is shown beforehand or included in the presentation request to the wallet. In the latter case, the wallet informs the user of the purpose before the user makes a choice"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The Verifier ensures that information collection purpose is sufficiently specific and communicated before collection.
For example, the purpose is shown beforehand or included in the presentation request to the wallet. In the latter case, the wallet informs the user of the purpose before the user makes a choice .
```

In both cases listed here, it needs to be considered that returning an error
response can also leak information about the processing outcome of `values`.

## User Consent and Choice {#user_consent_and_choice}

* Wallets should obtain explicit, informed consent from the End-User before releasing any Verifiable Credential or Presentation to a Verifier.

> * The Wallet should display the purpose and requested claims clearly, especially when `transaction_data` or `claim_sets` are used to express sensitive queries.

Author: Yeah, this text was written when DCQL had "purpose" field in it.

> * The Wallet should display the purpose and requested claims clearly, especially when `transaction_data` or `claim_sets` are used to express sensitive queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* If an error prevents the Wallet from honoring a request (e.g., missing credentials or mismatched claim values), the Wallet should inform the user in a privacy-preserving way.

## Purpose Legitimacy and Specification {#purpose_legitimacy_and_specification}

* The verifier ensures that the purposes are sufficiently specific and are communicated before the time the information is collected. For example, it is shown before the presentation request is sent or is sent in the request to the wallet. In the latter case, the wallet communicates them with the user before the user can make their choice. 

> * The verifier should ensure that the purpose complies with applicable law and relies on a permissible legal basis. 

Reviewer 4: Is reminding verifiers not to break the law needed? I think delving into legal recommendations is not in the scope of this spec.

Author: This is not a legal recommendation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
we talk about trust frameworks and policies but we have explicitly avoided talking about laws

unlinkability properties is the use of batch issuance, which is supported in [@?OpenID4VCI], with individual credentials
being presented only once.

> Note that the nature of the issuer of the credential may leak unnecessary information such as nationality or state of residence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the nature of the issuer of the credential may leak sensitive information such as nationality or state of residence.
```

### Strictly Necessary {#strictly_necessary}

* Verifiers SHOULD design queries that request only the minimal set of claims and credentials needed to fulfill the specified purposes. DCQL helps facilitate this. 

### No Fingerprinting {#no_fingerprinting}

Verifier SHOULD NOT attempt to fingerprint the wallets to track the user's visits.

## Data Minimization {#data_minimization}

### Wallet to verifier communication {#wallet_to_verifier_communication}

*   **HTTP Headers:** Wallets SHOULD only send the minimal amount of information possible, and in particular, without any HTTP headers identifying the software used for the request (e.g., HTTP libraries or their versions) when retrieving a `request_uri` or sending to `response_uri` to reduce the risk of fingerprinting and End-User tracking. 
    
*   **No unauthorized PII:** Wallets MUST NOT include any personally identifiable information (PII) in HTTP requests to Verifiers unless explicitly required for the flow and authorized by the user. 
    

> *   **No unauthorized request to Request URI:** If no End-User interaction is required before sending the request to Request URI, it is easy for a malicious verifier to obtain the wallet capabilities from all visitors of a website on a large scale and in an automated fashion. Even without personally identifiable information (PII) this can reveal some information about End-Users, like their nationality (e.g., a Wallet with special capabilities only used in one EU member state). Mandatory End-User interaction before sending the request, like clicking a button, unlocking the wallet or even just showing a screen of the app, can make this less attractive/likely to being exploited.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*   **No unauthorized request to Request URI:** If no End-User interaction is required before sending the request to Request URI, it is easy for a malicious Verifier to obtain the Wallet capabilities from all visitors of a website on a large scale and in an automated fashion. Even without personally identifiable information (PII) this can reveal some information about End-Users, like their nationality (e.g., a Wallet with special capabilities only used in one EU member state). Mandatory End-User interaction before sending the request, like clicking a button, unlocking the Wallet or even just showing a screen of the app, can make this less attractive/likely to being exploited.
```

> *   **Unlinkability:** Wallet can use ephemeral credentials only to achieve cross-session unlinkability. Wallet can use different instances of credentials to different verifiers to achieve cross-verifier unlinkability. Considerable discourse regarding unlinkability in salted-hash based selective disclosure mechanisms is provided in \[@?I-D.ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt, section 10.1\]. One technique mentioned to achieve some important unlinkability properties is the use of batch issuance, which is supported in \[@?OpenID4VCI\], with individual credentials being presented only once.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*   **Unlinkability:** Wallet can use ephemeral credentials only to achieve cross-session unlinkability. Wallet can use different instances of credentials to different Verifiers to achieve cross-Verifier unlinkability. Considerable discourse regarding unlinkability in salted-hash based selective disclosure mechanisms is provided in \[@?I-D.ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt, section 10.1\]. One technique mentioned to achieve some important unlinkability properties is the use of batch issuance, which is supported in \[@?OpenID4VCI\], with individual credentials being presented only once.
```

unlinkability properties is the use of batch issuance, which is supported in [@?OpenID4VCI], with individual credentials
being presented only once.

Note that the nature of the issuer of the credential may leak unnecessary information such as nationality or state of residence.

### Strictly Necessary {#strictly_necessary}

* Verifiers SHOULD design queries that request only the minimal set of claims and credentials needed to fulfill the specified purposes. DCQL helps facilitate this. 

### No Fingerprinting {#no_fingerprinting}

Verifier SHOULD NOT attempt to fingerprint the wallets to track the user's visits.

## Data Minimization {#data_minimization}

### Wallet to Verifier communication {#wallet_to_verifier_communication}

*   **HTTP Headers:** Wallets SHOULD only send the minimal amount of information possible, and in particular, without any HTTP headers identifying the software used for the request (e.g., HTTP libraries or their versions) when retrieving a `request_uri` or sending to `response_uri` to reduce the risk of fingerprinting and End-User tracking. 
    

> *   **No unauthorized PII:** Wallets MUST NOT include any personally identifiable information (PII) in HTTP requests to Verifiers unless explicitly required for the flow and authorized by the user. 

Reviewer: user approval is what is usually called "authorization", so i think current language it ok.

unlinkability properties is the use of batch issuance, which is supported in [@?OpenID4VCI], with individual credentials
being presented only once.

Note that the nature of the issuer of the credential may leak unnecessary information such as nationality or state of residence.

### Strictly Necessary {#strictly_necessary}

* Verifiers SHOULD design queries that request only the minimal set of claims and credentials needed to fulfill the specified purposes. DCQL helps facilitate this. 

### Claim Value Filtering {#claim_value_filtering}

Wallets SHOULD suppress claims from the response if their values do not match the requested values filter, unless user consent overrides this.

### No Fingerprinting {#no_fingerprinting}

Verifier SHOULD NOT attempt to fingerprint the wallets to track the user's visits.

> ### No Data Collection or Monitoring {#no_data_collection_or_monitoring}
> 
> Wallet providers are prohibited from collecting or monitoring data about how users interact with their wallets, digital IDs, or stored documents. This means providers cannot track user behavior or transactions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Wallet providers are prohibited from collecting or monitoring data about how users interact with their wallets, digital IDs, or stored documents. This means providers cannot track user behavior or transactions

Author: This section was created to cater for the active outsider attack scenario. As an attribute-based authentication protocol, the combination of I-H-V should consider such an attack scenario somewhere. The catch is that the specs are divided and do not seem to have an appropriate place to put them.

    
*   **Unlinkability:** Wallet can use ephemeral credentials only to achieve cross-session unlinkability. Wallet can use different instances of credentials to different verifiers to achieve cross-verifier unlinkability. Considerable discourse regarding unlinkability in salted-hash based selective disclosure mechanisms is provided in \[@?I-D.ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt, section 10.1\]. One technique mentioned to achieve some important unlinkability properties is the use of batch issuance, which is supported in \[@?OpenID4VCI\], with individual credentials being presented only once.
    

> *   **No excessive data**: If the verifier requests unusually large amounts of data, the wallet should warn the user and potentially stop processing. 

Author: I agree, but I also have to point out that this is a real privacy risk. The Cambridge Analytica case is a typical example. Perhaps just warn the user?

> *   **Passive outsider unobservability**: All communications between Wallets and Verifiers should be encrypted either by the transport layer or application layer so that the payload of the communication is unobservable by a passive outsider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> *   **Passive outsider unobservability**: All communications between Wallets and Verifiers should be encrypted either by the transport layer or application layer so that the payload of the communication is unobservable by a passive outsider.

Author: Passive outsider is the adversary that plays none of the user-agent, wallet, verifier or issuer roles but can
passively observe the content of all exchanged messages where target entity role is the holder. An example is a Wi-Fi provider. FYI, an active outsider is the adversary that plays one of the user-agent, wallet, verifier, or issuer role. So, if a browser is an adversary, then that is an active outsider. BTW, the word was taken from ISO/IEC 27551 Information security, cybersecurity and privacy protection — Requirements for attribute-based unlinkable entity authentication. 

Having said that, I am ok with dropping it, if all the communication between the wallet and the verifier is TLS or otherwise protected in OpenID4VP spec. Looking at the draft, it was not very clear for me. e.g., it was not easy for me to find the constraint to response_uri to be https URI where algs are those permitted by BCP 201.

* Authentication between the different parts within the Verifier
* Two cryptographically random numbers.  The first being used to manage state between the Wallet and Verifier. The second being used to ensure that only a legitimate component of the Verifier can obtain the Authorization Response data.

> ## User Authentication using Credentials {#end-user-authentication-using-credentials}

Reviewer 2: Same nit here

Presentations.

# Privacy Considerations {#privacy-considerations}

Many privacy considerations are specific to the Credential format and associated proof type used in a particular Presentation.

This section focuses on privacy considerations specific to the presentation protocol while also addressing cross-cutting concerns related to credential formats, Wallet behavior, and Verifier practices.

Wallet providers and Verifiers need to take into account privacy considerations in this section to mitigate the risks of
data leakage, user tracking, and other privacy harms.

## User Consent {#user_consent_and_choice}

Wallets SHOULD obtain explicit, informed consent from the End-User before releasing any Verifiable Credential or Presentation to a Verifier, or returning an error.

Transaction history and data within the Wallet SHOULD NOT be accessible to anyone other than the End-User, unless the End-User has given consent or there is another legal basis to do so.

## Privacy Notice {#privacy_notice}

Wallets SHOULD make their privacy notices readily available to the End-User.

## Purpose Legitimacy {#purpose_legitimacy_and_specification}

> The Verifier SHOULD ensure that information collection purpose is sufficiently specific and communicated before collection. For example, the purpose is shown to the End-User before or within the presentation request that is sent to the Wallet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Verifier SHOULD ensure that purpose for collecting the information it is requesting is sufficiently specific and communicated before collection. For example, the purpose is shown to the End-User before or within the presentation request that is sent to the Wallet.
```

MUST perform its own security checks on the returned Credentials and
Presentations.

# Privacy Considerations {#privacy-considerations}

Many privacy considerations are specific to the Credential format and associated proof type used in a particular Presentation.

This section focuses on privacy considerations specific to the presentation protocol while also addressing cross-cutting concerns related to credential formats, Wallet behavior, and Verifier practices.

Wallet providers and Verifiers need to take into account privacy considerations in this section to mitigate the risks of
data leakage, user tracking, and other privacy harms. These considerations inform the development of privacy risk analysis.

## User Consent {#user_consent_and_choice}

> Wallets SHOULD obtain explicit, informed consent from the End-User before releasing any Verifiable Credential or Presentation to a Verifier.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Wallets SHOULD obtain explicit, informed consent from the End-User before releasing any response to a Verifier, specifically those which contain a Verifiable Credential or Presentation.
```

I think we should be broader here as certain errors can leak possible information about the user back to the Verifier.

Reviewer 2: Right when i said response in this sentence I was meaning the OpenID4VP response not resolution of the request object if thats what you meant?

Perhaps this is clearer

```suggestion
Wallets SHOULD obtain explicit, informed consent from the End-User before releasing a Verifiable Credential or Presentation to a Verifier.
```

As the language implies more clearly there is really only one response the wallet sends in the protocol.

If an error prevents the Wallet from honoring a request (e.g., missing Credentials or mismatched claim values), the Wallet SHOULD inform the End-User in a privacy-preserving way.

Transaction history and data within the Wallet SHOULD NOT be accessible to anyone other than the End-User, unless the End-User has given consent or there is another legal basis to do so.

## Privacy Notice {#privacy_notice}

Wallets SHOULD make their privacy notices readily available to the End-User.

## Purpose Legitimacy {#purpose_legitimacy_and_specification}

> The Verifier SHOULD ensure that information collection purpose is sufficiently specific and communicated before collection. For example, the purpose is shown to the End-User before the presentation request is sent to the Wallet.

Reviewer: we do not have a mechanism to show purpose within the presentation

> The Verifier SHOULD ensure that information collection purpose is sufficiently specific and communicated before collection. For example, the purpose is shown to the End-User before the presentation request is sent to the Wallet.

Reviewer 5: It was in for a long time and removed with the condition that profiles may re-add it. Could be part of things like verifier_info

> If the Wallet has indications that the Verifier is requesting data that it is not entitled to, the Wallet SHOULD warn the End-User and potentially stop processing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the Wallet has indications that the Verifier is requesting data that it is not entitled to, the Wallet SHOULD warn the End-User.
```

I don't know how to interpret "potentially stop processing" here and I feel this might lead to interoperability issues if we include it. If we think the text without this is insufficient then perhaps we should consider saying something like sending an error in response.

Reviewer 2: I think what I'm saying is that "stop processing" is ambiguous and could lead to interoperability issues. Even without this text it remains in the wallets discretion to do what it likes beyond warning the user.

Reviewer: i don't think anything in privacy considerations section leads to the interoperability issues. entire section describes how to implement what is already interoperable in a privacy preserving manner.

## Selective Disclosure {#selective-disclosure}

Selective disclosure is a data minimization technique that allows for sharing only the specific information needed from
a Credential without revealing all of the claims contained in that Credential.

The DCQL helps facilitate selective disclosure by allowing the Verifier to specify the claims it is interested in,

> allowing the Wallet to disclose only the claims that are relevant to the Verifier's request.

Reviewer 6: While true, it's not clear to me that this additional text is necessary or will improve readers' understanding of the privacy characteristics.

> allowing the Wallet to disclose only the claims that are relevant to the Verifier's request.

Reviewer 7: I also don't see why this addition is necessary.

### DCQL Value Matching {#dcql-value-matching}

When using DCQL `values` to match the expected values of claims, the fact that a
claim within a certain Credential matched a value or did not match a value might
already leak information about the claim value. Therefore, Wallets MUST take
precautions against leaking information about the claim value when processing
`values`. This SHOULD include, in particular:

- ensuring that a Verifier, in the response, cannot distinguish between the case where an End-User did
  not consent to releasing the Credential and the case where the claim value did
  not match the expected value, and
- preventing repeated or "silent" requests leaking data to the Verifier without
  the user's consent by ensuring that all requests, even if no response can be
  sent by the Wallet due to a `values` mismatch, require some form of End-User
  interaction before a response is sent.

In both cases listed here, it needs to be considered that returning an error
response can also leak information about the processing outcome of `values`.

### Strictly Necessary Claims {#strictly_necessary}

> Verifiers SHOULD design DCQL queries that request only the minimal set of claims and Credentials needed to fulfill the specified purposes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Verifiers SHOULD use DCQL queries that request only the minimal set of claims and Credentials needed to fulfill the specified purposes.
```

Minor but many verifiers may used pre-developed queries that are set by ecosystems, hence aren't the designer.

> ## Verifier-to-Verifier Unlinkability

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Verifier-to-Verifier Unlinkable Credential Presentations
```

The below paragraph only really considers how a wallet might avoid two presentations across verifier and or sessions being linked because of the credential, there are other ways presentations might be linked so this section should be more specifically scoped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Verifier-to-Verifier Unlinkable Presentations
```

> Wallet can use ephemeral Credentials only to achieve cross-session unlinkability. Wallet can use different instances of Credentials to different Verifiers to achieve cross-Verifier unlinkability. Considerable discourse regarding unlinkability in salted-hash based selective disclosure mechanisms is provided in section 10.1 of [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt]. One technique mentioned to achieve some important unlinkability properties is the use of batch issuance, which is supported in [@!OpenID4VCI], with individual Credentials being presented only once.

Reviewer 2: Thanks @paulbastian updated the text based on your suggestion.

```suggestion
Even when using selective disclosure to reveal limited claims from a Credential to a verifier there are ways in which a Credentials Presentation could be linked to another Presentation in another session and or a Presentation to another Verifier. For example with credential formats such as SD-JWT and mDoc, the issuer signature on a Credential or the public key a Credential is bound to, can provide a Verifier with a way to link the Credential across different presentations or sessions. In order to avoid such linking a Wallet can use multiple instances of a Credential, each with unique issuer signatures and associated public keys to limit this. For example a Wallet may use an issued Credential instance only once in a Presentation to a specific Verifier, before discarding the credential, thus avoiding linking on the above basis ever occurring. Alternatively, a Wallet may apply a limited use policy for a specific instance of a Credential, perhaps only allowing it to be presented to the same Verifier to avoid Verifier to Verifier link-ability. Considerable discourse regarding unlinkability in salted-hash based selective disclosure mechanisms is provided in section 10.1 of [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt]. One technique mentioned to achieve some important unlinkability properties is the use of batch issuance, which is supported in [@!OpenID4VCI], with individual Credentials being presented only once.
```

> Wallet can use ephemeral Credentials only to achieve cross-session unlinkability. Wallet can use different instances of Credentials to different Verifiers to achieve cross-Verifier unlinkability. Considerable discourse regarding unlinkability in salted-hash based selective disclosure mechanisms is provided in section 10.1 of [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt]. One technique mentioned to achieve some important unlinkability properties is the use of batch issuance, which is supported in [@!OpenID4VCI], with individual Credentials being presented only once.

Reviewer 6: verifier -> Verifier

> Wallet can use ephemeral Credentials only to achieve cross-session unlinkability. Wallet can use different instances of Credentials to different Verifiers to achieve cross-Verifier unlinkability. Considerable discourse regarding unlinkability in salted-hash based selective disclosure mechanisms is provided in section 10.1 of [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt]. One technique mentioned to achieve some important unlinkability properties is the use of batch issuance, which is supported in [@!OpenID4VCI], with individual Credentials being presented only once.

Reviewer 6: link-ability -> linkability

> Wallet can use ephemeral Credentials only to achieve cross-session unlinkability. Wallet can use different instances of Credentials to different Verifiers to achieve cross-Verifier unlinkability. Considerable discourse regarding unlinkability in salted-hash based selective disclosure mechanisms is provided in section 10.1 of [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt]. One technique mentioned to achieve some important unlinkability properties is the use of batch issuance, which is supported in [@!OpenID4VCI], with individual Credentials being presented only once.

Reviewer 7: section 10.1 -> Section 10.1

> Wallet can use ephemeral Credentials only to achieve cross-session unlinkability. Wallet can use different instances of Credentials to different Verifiers to achieve cross-Verifier unlinkability. Considerable discourse regarding unlinkability in salted-hash based selective disclosure mechanisms is provided in section 10.1 of [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt]. One technique mentioned to achieve some important unlinkability properties is the use of batch issuance, which is supported in [@!OpenID4VCI], with individual Credentials being presented only once.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even when using selective disclosure to reveal limited claims from a Credential to a Verifier, there are ways in which a Presentation could be linked to another Presentation in another session or a Presentation to another Verifier. For example, with Credential formats such as SD-JWT and mdoc, the Issuer signature on a Credential or the public key a Credential is bound to, can provide a Verifier with a way to link the Credential across different Presentations or sessions. In order to avoid such linking, a Wallet can use multiple instances of a Credential, each with unique Issuer signatures and associated public keys to limit this:

 - a Wallet can use an issued Credential instance only once in a Presentation to a specific Verifier, before discarding the Credential, thus avoiding linking on the above basis ever occurring
 - a Wallet can apply a limited use policy for a specific instance of a Credential, perhaps only allowing it to be presented to the same Verifier to avoid Verifier to Verifier linkability
 
Considerable discourse regarding unlinkability in salted-hash based selective disclosure mechanisms is provided in Section 10.1 of [@!I-D.ietf-oauth-selective-disclosure-jwt]. One technique mentioned to achieve some important unlinkability properties is the use of batch issuance, which is supported in [@!OpenID4VCI], with individual Credentials being presented only once.
```

## No Fingerprinting of the Wallets {#no_fingerprinting}

> Verifier SHOULD NOT attempt to fingerprint the Wallets to track the End-User's visits.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A Verifier SHOULD NOT attempt to fingerprint the End-User based on metadata that may be available in the interaction with the End-Users wallet..
```

> A Verifier SHOULD NOT attempt to fingerprint the End-User based on metadata that may be available in the interaction with the End-Users wallet.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A Verifier SHOULD NOT attempt to fingerprint the End-User based on metadata that may be available in the interaction with the End-User's wallet.
```

## Information Security {#information_security}

> Wallet providers and Verifiers SHOULD choose the options in the protocols described in this document so that the data in transit is integrity, confidentiality and availability protected. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Wallet providers and Verifiers SHOULD choose the options in the protocols described in this document so that the data in transit is integrity protected and confidentiality over the data is maintained. 
```

Now that I've made this edit, I'm not sure we should have this statement because regardless of the choices made I would argue integrity and confidentiality is maintained its just based on what security assumptions one is willing to make e.g what are you willing to trust TLS, the browser etc.

Reviewer 2: On the above basis, suggesting we remove this sentence.

```suggestion
```

Reviewer: agreed.

> Wallet providers and Verifiers SHOULD choose the options in the protocols described in this document so that the data in transit is integrity, confidentiality and availability protected. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Wallet providers and Verifiers SHOULD choose the options in the protocols described in this document so that the data in transit is integrity, confidentiality, and availability protected. 
```

> Both Wallet providers and Verifiers SHOULD be protecting PII under their respective authority with appropriate controls at the operational, functional, and strategic level to ensure the integrity, confidentiality, and availability of the PII, and protect it against risks such as unauthorized access, destruction, use, modification, disclosure or loss throughout the whole of its life cycle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both Wallet providers and Verifiers SHOULD apply suitable security controls at the operational, functional, and strategic level to ensure the integrity, confidentiality and general handling of PII. Furthermore they should consider protections against risks such as unauthorized access, destruction, use, modification, disclosure or loss throughout the whole of its life cycle.
```

## Wallet to Verifier Communication {#wallet_to_verifier_communication}

> Wallets SHOULD only send the minimal amount of information possible, and in particular, without any HTTP headers identifying the software used for the request (e.g., HTTP libraries or their versions) when retrieving a `request_uri` or sending to `response_uri` to reduce the risk of fingerprinting and End-User tracking.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Wallets SHOULD only send the minimal amount of information possible, and in particular, avoid sending any additional HTTP headers identifying the software used for the request (e.g., HTTP libraries or their versions) when retrieving a `request_uri` or sending to `response_uri` to reduce the risk of fingerprinting and End-User tracking.
```

Wallets MUST NOT include any personally identifiable information (PII) in HTTP requests to Verifiers unless explicitly required for the flow and authorized by the End-User.

### Establishing Trust in the Request URI {#request_uri_and_trust_relationships}

Wallets operating within a trust framework SHOULD validate that the Request URI is properly associated with the Client Identifier and authorized for the request.

Untrusted or unrecognized Request URI endpoints SHOULD be rejected or require End-User confirmation before proceeding.

> ### Authorization Requests with Request URI {#authorization_requests_with_request_uri}

Reviewer 8: Does the same apply to `response_uri` endpoint?

If the Wallet is acting within a trust framework that allows the Wallet to determine whether a Request URI belongs to a certain Client Identifier, the Wallet is RECOMMENDED to validate the Verifier's authenticity and authorization given by the Client Identifier and that the Request URI corresponds to this Verifier. If the link cannot be established in those cases, the Wallet MUST refuse the request.

> If no End-User interaction is required before sending the request, it is easy to request on a large scale and in an automated fashion the Wallet capabilities from all visitors of a website. Even without PII this can reveal some information about End-Users, like their nationality (e.g., a Wallet with special capabilities only used in one EU member state).

Reviewer 6: Even without PII -> Even without PII,

> If no End-User interaction is required before sending the request, it is easy to request on a large scale and in an automated fashion the Wallet capabilities from all visitors of a website. Even without PII this can reveal some information about End-Users, like their nationality (e.g., a Wallet with special capabilities only used in one EU member state).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no End-User interaction is required before sending the request, it is easy to request on a large scale and in an automated fashion the Wallet capabilities from all visitors of a website. Even without PII, this can reveal some information about End-Users, like their nationality (e.g., a Wallet with special capabilities only used in one EU member state).
```

> Mandatory End-User interaction before sending the request, like clicking a button, unlocking the Wallet or even just showing a screen of the app, can make this less attractive/likely to being exploited.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Mandatory End-User interaction before sending the request, like clicking a button or unlocking the Wallet, can make this less attractive/likely to being exploited.
```

Just showing the screen of the app is not really an End-User interaction from my POV, instead an End-User interaction is something that has to solicit input from the user in some fashion.

## Error Responses

> Error responses SHOULD avoid including sensitive or detailed contextual information that could be used to infer End-User's data.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Error responses SHOULD avoid including sensitive or detailed contextual information that could be used to infer the End-User's data.
```

### `wallet_unavailable` Authorization Error Response {#authorization_error_responsewith_the_wallet_unavailable_error_code}

In the event that another component is invoked instead of the Wallet, the End-User SHOULD be informed and give consent before the invoked component returns the `wallet_unavailable` Authorization Error Response to the Verifier.

### Digital Credential API Error Responses {#privacy-dc-api-error}

> Returning any OpenID4VP protocol error, regardless of content, can reveal additional information about the End-User’s underlying Credentials or Wallet in a way that is unique to the Digital Credentials API since reaching the Wallet can be dependent on a Wallet's ability to satisfy the request. For example, platform implementations could only allow Wallets to be selected that satisfy the request. In this case, returning an OpenID4VP protocol error responses can only be returned by a selected Wallet and would therefore reveal that the End-User is in possession of Credentials that satisfy the request. This is in contrast to other engagement methods, where the Wallet receives the request before learning if it can be fulfilled. What is revealed by a Wallet in those cases depends on how each individual Wallet processes a request.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Returning any OpenID4VP protocol error, regardless of content, can reveal additional information about the End-User’s underlying Credentials or Wallet in a way that is unique to the Digital Credentials API since reaching the Wallet can be dependent on a Wallet's ability to satisfy the request. For example, platform implementations could only allow Wallets to be selected that satisfy the request. In this case, OpenID4VP protocol error responses can only be returned by a selected Wallet and would therefore reveal that the End-User is in possession of Credentials that satisfy the request. This is in contrast to other engagement methods, in which the Wallet receives the request before learning if it can be fulfilled. What is revealed by a Wallet in those cases depends on how each individual Wallet processes the request.
```

The more narrow a request is, the more information is revealed: 

 * A request that can be fulfilled by a broad range of documents will only reveal that the End-User has a Credential from a large set of documents.
 * A request for a single document type will reveal the End-User is in possession of that Credential. How sensitive this is would depend on the particular Credential.
 * A request with which can only be satisfied by a single trusted authority will reveal that the End-User has a Credential from a particular authority, from which other attributes may be inferred. 

>  * A request with value matching (as defined in (#selecting_claims)) will reveal specific value of that claim/attribute. 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
 * A request with value matching (as defined in (#selecting_claims)) will reveal the specific value of that claim/attribute. 
```

## Wallet to Verifier Communication {#wallet_to_verifier_communication}

Wallets SHOULD only send the minimal amount of information possible, and in particular, avoid sending any additional HTTP headers identifying the software used for the request (e.g., HTTP libraries or their versions) when retrieving a `request_uri` or sending to `response_uri` to reduce the risk of fingerprinting and End-User tracking.

Wallets MUST NOT include any personally identifiable information (PII) in HTTP requests to Verifiers unless explicitly required for the flow and authorized by the End-User.

### Establishing Trust in the Request URI {#request_uri_and_trust_relationships}

Wallets operating within a trust framework SHOULD validate that the Request URI is properly associated with the Client Identifier and authorized for the request.

Untrusted or unrecognized Request URI endpoints SHOULD be rejected or require End-User confirmation before proceeding.

> ### Authorization Requests with Request URI {#authorization_requests_with_request_uri}

Reviewer: this section has caused some confusion - probably need to discuss in the WG

Reviewer: discussed in the WG call

Ecosystems that plan to leverage the trusted authorities mechanisms SHOULD make sure that the privacy properties of the mechanisms they choose to support matches with the desired privacy properties of the overall ecosystem.

## Use, Retention and Disclosure Limitation {#use_retention_and_disclosure_limitation}

### Unobservability by Wallets {#unobservability_by_wallets}

    
*   **User-Only Visibility**: Transaction history and data within the wallet should not be accessible to anyone other than the user, unless the user has given consent or there is another legal basis to do so.
    

> *   **Prevention of Profiling and Tracking:** The wallet's design incorporates data minimization principles, ensuring that only essential information is shared during interactions. This limits opportunities for profiling or linking user activities across different services

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*   **Prevention of Profiling and Tracking:** The Wallet's design incorporates data minimization principles, ensuring that only essential information is shared during interactions. This limits opportunities for profiling or linking user activities across different services
```

## Accuracy and Quality {#accuracy_and_quality}

* Verifiers should establish a means to detect status change (e.g. revocation) of the obtained credentials through the OpenID4VP protocol. (e.g., through StatusList.) 
    
## Openness, Transparency and Notice {#openness_transparency_and_notice}

*   Wallet should make its privacy notices readily available to the user. 
        
## Information Security {#information_security}

> *   Wallet providers and verifiers should choose the options in the protocols described in this document so that the data in transit is integrity, confidentiality and availability protected. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*   Wallet providers and Verifiers should choose the options in the protocols described in this document so that the data in transit is integrity, confidentiality and availability protected. 
```

> *   Both Wallet providers and verifiers should be protecting PII under its authority with appropriate controls at the operational, functional and strategic level to ensure the integrity, confidentiality and availability of the PII, and protect it against risks such as unauthorized access, destruction, use, modification, disclosure or loss throughout the whole of its life cycle;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*   Both Wallet providers and Verifiers should be protecting PII under its authority with appropriate controls at the operational, functional and strategic level to ensure the integrity, confidentiality and availability of the PII, and protect it against risks such as unauthorized access, destruction, use, modification, disclosure or loss throughout the whole of its life cycle;
```

> *   Both Wallet providers and verifiers should be protecting PII under its authority with appropriate controls at the operational, functional and strategic level to ensure the integrity, confidentiality and availability of the PII, and protect it against risks such as unauthorized access, destruction, use, modification, disclosure or loss throughout the whole of its life cycle;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Both Wallet providers and Verifiers should be protecting PII under their respective authority with appropriate controls at the operational, functional, and strategic level to ensure the integrity, confidentiality, and availability of the PII, and protect it against risks such as unauthorized access, destruction, use, modification, disclosure or loss throughout the whole of its life cycle;
```

Ecosystems that plan to leverage the trusted authorities mechanisms SHOULD make sure that the privacy properties of the mechanisms they choose to support matches with the desired privacy properties of the overall ecosystem.

## Use, Retention and Disclosure Limitation {#use_retention_and_disclosure_limitation}

### Unobservability by Wallets {#unobservability_by_wallets}

    
*   **User-Only Visibility**: Transaction history and data within the wallet should not be accessible to anyone other than the user, unless the user has given consent or there is another legal basis to do so.
    
*   **Prevention of Profiling and Tracking:** The wallet's design incorporates data minimization principles, ensuring that only essential information is shared during interactions. This limits opportunities for profiling or linking user activities across different services

## Accuracy and Quality {#accuracy_and_quality}

> * Verifiers should establish a means to detect status change (e.g. revocation) of the obtained credentials through the OpenID4VP protocol. (e.g., through StatusList.) 

Reviewer 9: This is really weird wording. It is upto the issuer (not the verifier) whether a revocation mechanism is made available.

All we can say is that is the credential has a revocation method the verifier should consider using it?

    
## Openness, Transparency and Notice {#openness_transparency_and_notice}

*   Wallet should keep track of the verifiers’ privacy notices and make them readily available to the user.   
*   Wallet should make its privacy notices readily available to the user. 

> *   A privacy notice should at least include:  
>     *   the specified PII required for the specified purpose;
>     *   the specified purpose for PII collection;
>     *   the specified processing (including collection, communication and storage mechanisms);
>     *   the types of authorized natural persons who will access the PII and to whom the PII can be transferred; and
>     *   the specified PII retention and disposal requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
out of scope for the protocol

### Unobservability by Wallets {#unobservability_by_wallets}

    
*   **User-Only Visibility**: Transaction history and data within the Wallet should not be accessible to anyone other than the user, unless the user has given consent or there is another legal basis to do so.
    
*   **Prevention of Profiling and Tracking:** The Wallet's design incorporates data minimization principles, ensuring that only essential information is shared during interactions. This limits opportunities for profiling or linking user activities across different services

## Accuracy and Quality {#accuracy_and_quality}

* Verifiers should establish a means to detect status change (e.g. revocation) of the obtained credentials through the OpenID4VP protocol. (e.g., through StatusList.) 
    
## Openness, Transparency and Notice {#openness_transparency_and_notice}

*   Wallets should make their privacy notices readily available to the user. 
        
## Information Security {#information_security}

*   Wallet providers and Verifiers should choose the options in the protocols described in this document so that the data in transit is integrity, confidentiality and availability protected. 

> *   Both Wallet providers and Verifiers should be protecting PII under their respective authority with appropriate controls at the operational, functional, and strategic level to ensure the integrity, confidentiality, and availability of the PII, and protect it against risks such as unauthorized access, destruction, use, modification, disclosure or loss throughout the whole of its life cycle;

Reviewer 3: Thought:

In VP spec we mention how a wallet can trust a verifier https://openid.github.io/OpenID4VP/openid-4-verifiable-presentations-wg-draft.html#name-verifier-attestation-jwt.
And in VCI there is mention about trust between issuer and wallet.

In this PR should we mention somewhere that "Verifier should trust the Issuer, to make sure that the wallet adheres to certain policies and, potentially, was audited and approved under a certain regulatory and/or commercial scheme."

This seems relevant to how this point can be actionably enforced?

Ecosystems that plan to leverage the trusted authorities mechanisms SHOULD make sure that the privacy properties of the mechanisms they choose to support matches with the desired privacy properties of the overall ecosystem.

## Use, Retention and Disclosure Limitation {#use_retention_and_disclosure_limitation}

### Unobservability by Wallets {#unobservability_by_wallets}

> *   **No Data Collection or Monitoring**: Wallet providers are prohibited from collecting or monitoring data about how users interact with their wallets, digital IDs, or stored documents. This means providers cannot track user behavior or transactions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> *   **User-Only Visibility**: Only the user can view their transaction history and data within the wallet. Even issuers of digital documents (e.g., IDs or licenses) are not informed when these documents are used. 

Reviewer 10: This should also be out of scope for a presentation protocol. There are many deployment scenarios, e.g an enterprise wallet may indeed have monitoring and access to transaction history by the IT admin etc..

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Is it not the fundamental privacy property that we want to achieve?

    
*   **Prevention of Profiling and Tracking:** The wallet's design incorporates data minimization principles, ensuring that only essential information is shared during interactions. This limits opportunities for profiling or linking user activities across different services

### Verifier's Use, Retention and Disclosure Limitation {#verifiers_use_retntion_and_disclosure_limitation}

> Verifier should

Reviewer 10: Should remove this section. The presentation protocol spec shouldn't define how Verifiers use data.

> ### Verifier's Use, Retention and Disclosure Limitation {#verifiers_use_retntion_and_disclosure_limitation}
> 
> Verifier should
> 
> *  limit the use, retention and disclosure of PII to that which is necessary in order to fulfil specific, explicit and legitimate purposes communicated to the user; 
> *  retain PII only as long as necessary to fulfil the stated purpose or as long as it is valid; and 
> *  lock any PII when and for as long as the stated purposes have expired, but where applicable laws require retention. 
>     

Reviewer: ```suggestion   
```

## Accuracy and Quality {#accuracy_and_quality}

> * Verifiers ensure that the PII processed is accurate, complete, up-to-date (unless there is a legitimate basis for keeping outdated data), adequate and relevant for the purpose of use. This could be achieved by only accepting credentials from trusted issuers and checking the issuance and expiry date.

Reviewer 10: I'd remove this too. would be out of scope for this spec

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> * If making changes to the already collected and stored data, the verifier should make sure that the new presentation is about the same user.

Reviewer 10: I'd remove this. Not sure its needed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* Verifiers should establish a means to detect status change (e.g. revocation) of the obtained credentials through the OpenID4VP protocol. (e.g., through StatusList.) 
    

> ## Openness, Transparency and Notice {#openness_transparency_and_notice}

Reviewer 10: Remove this section. This level of wallet UX should be out of scope of this spec

Author: Again, it is an important privacy consideration for the I-H-V system from the point of view of privacy principles. Maybe not in this spec.

> ## Openness, Transparency and Notice {#openness_transparency_and_notice}
> 
> *   Wallet should keep track of the verifiers’ privacy notices and make them readily available to the user.   
> *   Wallet should make its privacy notices readily available to the user. 
> *   A privacy notice should at least include:  
>     *   the specified PII required for the specified purpose;
>     *   the specified purpose for PII collection;
>     *   the specified processing (including collection, communication and storage mechanisms);
>     *   the types of authorized natural persons who will access the PII and to whom the PII can be transferred; and
>     *   the specified PII retention and disposal requirements.
>         

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: While DCQL has lost "purpose", there are still some relevant text in 5.11 verifier attestations. 
Perhaps we could rephrase to something like: 

* Verifier Attestations allow verifier to communicate context of the use of PII such as acceptable use, retention periods, or access rights etc. to improve openness and transparency.

> ## Individual Participation and Access {#individual_paricipation_and_access}

Reviewer 10: Remove this section. Its out of scope for this spec

> ## Individual Participation and Access {#individual_paricipation_and_access}
> 
> Wallets should
> 
> *   provide access to the user of the list of verifiers that presentations were made, including date, purposes and claims/credentials;  and 
> *   enable the user to revoke the use or deletion of data stored at the verifier. 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ## Accountability {#accountability}

Reviewer 10: Remove this section. Out of scope for this spec

> ## Accountability {#accountability}
> 
> Both wallet providers and verifiers should
> 
> *   document and communicate as appropriate all privacy-related policies, procedures and practices, including what options in the protocols are used. 
> 
> Verifier should 
> 
> *   sign the request so that it will not be able to repudiate the request; and 
> *   be able to demonstrate compliance with the policies by producing evidence.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Information Security {#information_security}

*   Wallet providers and verifiers should choose the options in the protocols described in this document so that the data in transit is integrity, confidentiality and availability protected. 

> *   Both Wallet providers and verifiers should be protecting PII under its authority with appropriate controls at the operational, functional and strategic level to ensure the integrity, confidentiality and availability of the PII, and protect it against risks such as unauthorized access, destruction, use, modification, disclosure or loss throughout the whole of its life cycle;

Reviewer 10: Remove this

Reviewer: second bullet point or the section?

Author: At least, the first bullet point pertains to the protocol. The second point is on the Wallet provider, so it may go.

** NOTE **: Implementers should also refer to the Security Considerations section of this document. 

> ## Privacy Compliance {#privacy_compliance}

Reviewer 10: Remove this section. It would be out of scope for this spec

> ## Privacy Compliance {#privacy_compliance}
> 
> Wallet providers and verifiers should:
> 
> *   Conduct periodic audits to verify and demonstrate that their processing meets privacy safeguarding requirements;
> *   Implement appropriate internal controls and independent supervision mechanisms to ensure compliance with relevant privacy laws and their security, data protection, and privacy policies; and 
> *   Develop and maintain privacy risk assessments to evaluate whether programs and services involving personal identifiable information comply with data protection and privacy requirements. 
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

        </front>
</reference>

> <reference anchor="ISO.29100" target="https://www.iso.org/standard/85938.html">
>         <front>
>           <title>ISO/IEC 29100:2024 Information technology — Security techniques — Privacy framework</title>
>           <author>
>             <organization> ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 27 Information security, cybersecurity and privacy protection</organization>
>           </author>
>           <date year="2024"/>
>         </front>
> </reference>
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The following security considerations from OpenID4VP apply:

* Preventing Replay of Verifiable Presentations as described in (#preventing-replay), with the difference that the origin is used instead of the Client Identifier to bind the response to the Client.

> * User Authentication using Credentials as described in (#end-user-authentication-using-credentials).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* End-User Authentication using Credentials as described in (#end-user-authentication-using-credentials).
```
